## BIBO 2.0 Proposal – Zoom call - minutes

This agenda: https://hackmd.io/@dcmi-ub/bibo-proposal

Tuesday, 2026-02-17 15:00 UTC

Zoom: https://us02web.zoom.us/j/89590350199

Attendees: Niklas (chair), Argie (scribe), Joe, Karen, Phil, Tom

### BIBO Ontology 2.0 – a proposal
- https://github.com/dcmi/bibo/issues/8

Today: discuss a proposal to create a slimmed-down BIBO Ontology 2.0 document that describes (only) the properties and classes (and two individuals) that are identified with BIBO namespace URIs.

Proposed that term descriptions remain unchanged with the following exceptions:
- Assertions of `rdfs:isDefinedBy` will be corrected.
- Assertions of `vs:term_status` will be dropped.
- Assertions about OWL restrictions and union classes will be dropped.

Note:
- All assertions about terms in other namespaces will be dropped.
- Also dropped will be two controlled vocabularies -- one for "degrees" and one for "status" -- each of which has its own namespace URI.

Questions for discussion:
1. "BIBO Ontology 2.0" 
  - Is the planned document appropriately named and scoped?
2. "Everything else" from BIBO Ontology 1.3 (current version)
  - Where should the two controlled vocabularies be documented?
  - Should the assertions about terms from other namespace be captured somewhere, e.g., in SHACL?

Issues discussed on this call will be considered by the Usage Board before deciding on the proposal.

### Notes from the discussion

- Niklas: First, we propose a much needed clean-up to keep BIBO usable, and as preparation to add further terms.
  - BIBO ontology and IRI will stay, and all terms defined there, except vs:term_status and rdfs:isDefinedBy.
  - Antoine commented in GitHub issue that separate vocabularies for degrees and status may be more cumbersome to maintain.
  - Dropping restrictions should not interrupt usage of BIBO "in the wild"
  - two uses of UnionOf -- first one easily solvable by a simpler base class, second a bit more tricky
  - we also suggest dropping references to other namespaces that we suspect have come in by using Protégé; we could capture that by usage examples
- Karen: It would be possible to consider BIBO as an AP with all the constraints of an AP; by creating BIBO 2.0 we could also talk about BIBO 1.1 as a particular AP and BIBO 2.0 is "the vocabulary" 
- Niklas: not same distinction as DC elements and DC terms; but it makes sense; that also answers the question if we use DatatypeProperty and ObjectProperty; it is not illegal to just use rdf:Property alongside with it
- Tom: maybe Karen meant that current BIBO also provides a selection of terms from DC and other namespaces, and we would use that information unless we express the BIBO AP via a SHACL/SHeX document
- Tom: sympathetic to the idea of calling the new collection of terms the "BIBO vocabulary"
- Niklas: I prefer "BIBO ontology" since it will not change in nature; BIBO is an extension of DC terms and FOAF and such but of course that can also be captured via APs; in any case we should preserve the references to other namespaces elsewhere if we drop them from the BIBO document
- Karen: DC 1.1 vs DC terms -- same term in DC terms is subproperty of the one in 1.1
- Karen created some diagrams that show the BIBO elements in the context of being subproperties of terms from other namespaces
- Niklas: we propose to revise the way that BIBO terms are represented, not to add any terms just yet with this revision
- Tom: namespace URIs are not supposed to reflect versioning anymore; that said, BIBO is versioned, we are currently on 1.3; so calling it 2.0 calls attention to the change in scope but after that maybe we should not continue versioning for every addition
- Karen: my comment did not refer to versioning but whether we should preserve the subproperty relationships between BIBO terms and terms from other namespaces
- Tom: the proposal is to keep those assertions, we did not suggest to delete those
- More precise: We propose to drop assertions with subjects from other namespaces, not from BIBO (we should revise that formulation in the proposal)
- Niklas: property chain assertions ... not the case here; also we are not talking about restrictions in this sentence
- Karen: BIBO vocabulary without properties and classes from other namespaces, how useful is it going to be? e.g. foaf:Organization; so users will have to define their own classes
- Tom: that would be handled by an AP so that users do not have to go searching on their own; a bit beyond the scope of what we need in order to start adding more terms to BIBO
- Karen: if users of BIBO are using classes like foaf:Organization then they cannot use BIBO 2.0?
- Niklas: but it does not define/restrict foaf? you can use whatever you like in combination?
- Karen: so people would have to create their own AP?
- Tom: this is why I have favoured to call it "BIBO vocabulary" bc we would be taking away this AP-like information
- Karen: and most users don't know the difference, most users think of it as describing their data, not pure RDF handling, they don't even know about domains and ranges
- Niklas: ontology documents are not supposed to redeclare terms from other vocabularies; there is no actual ambiguity
- Tom: it's a question of what people associate with what type of document/resource; in an AP they would expect elements from different namespaces
- Karen: people need to see that they have everything they need
- Niklas: I never expected namespaces to include each other when I used them together; what users that don't know RDF download the BIBO vocabulary?
- Phil: programmers download RDF schema and expect something like JSON schema
- **partial consensus:** We need to publish BIBO 2.0 as an ontology to keep the formal standard, and we need to accomplish it with an AP and vocabulary (as two different artefacts under the BIBO ontology) to serve the wider data describing community -- it's all about the messaging!
- Niklas: we should be clear in our messaging that you can use any parts of the BIBO ontology as needed, in combination with others ontologies as needed
- Karen: that's what people did 15 years ago, and now we have moved on to APs and shapes and such
- Niklas: we should explain the genesis of the "Protégé style terms" (maybe without mentioning "Protégé") and why we suggest to drop them
- Tom: we should be careful to judge what people are doing one way or the other, it is just different ways of doing things
- Niklas: some things are problematic under the social contract; maybe we need to say something about that to explain why we suggest to remove restrictions etc.; not wrong per se but invites complications
- Karen: what we said in AP work: you can narrow the use of somebody else's terms, and if you want to use something that has to be a URI you can do that as long as it does not conflict with the original definition
- Phil: we need to make clear that don't associate _your_ narrowing down within the AP with the original definition -- your statement does not clash with or affect the original definition in any way
- Tom: that's the same purpose that SHeX or SHACL serve
- Karen: those are all assertions, do not interfere with original ontologies
- Niklas: we need to make it more clear in the proposal that we will accompany BIBO 2.0 with a SHACL shape and/or DC TAP document to guide users
- Tom: prefer DC TAP bc it is a bit more non-committal, good idea
- Niklas: I could look at that next month how to linearize this information with DC TAP
- Joe: we need to do some definitorial work bc we don't yet have a shared understanding about all the things we are mentioning ("vocabulary" etc.)
- (wrapping up) but in general we seem to be in agreement what we want to do going forward
- Karen: concrete steps?
- Tom: generate new document ("namespace document" or "ontology") and express the rest of the information that we are excising via DC TAP
- Niklas: also expressing those in SHeX/SHACL should be doable
- Tom: nice teaching moment / exercise of transferring Protégé style document into a namespace document on the one hand and SHACL/SHeX shape on the other
- Karen: I would like to see that spelled out! bc BIBO classes are often treated as list of types
- Tom: We as UB chairs do not intend to exclude anybody from that exercise! would welcome as many people (at least UB members) as possible participating in this (and good to know that Bruce D'Arcus is supportive as well)
- Niklas: when we do DC TAP document for this we might to review the examples in the BIBO document; we need to check how many shapes should be created for the classes in BIBO
- Karen: do we know who all uses BIBO?
- Niklas: schema.org uses some (very few) terms from BIBO; Spanish National Library possibly have based their ontologies in part on BIBO?

ACTION for UB Chairs (welcoming help of other willing UB members) to generate/draft necessary documents and bring them back to the UB for approval (via follow-up email and a subsequent call)
